---
layout: post
title: "Pointers"
categories: notes
---

So far in class, every time we have wanted to reference some data, we have done so directly using variables.

```cpp
ofImage puppiesImg;
```

`puppiesImg` is a variable that can hold an `ofImage`. The variable is referencing the object itself, and we can access the variables and functions inside of it using the dot `.` operator.

```cpp
puppiesImg.load("puppies.png");
puppiesImg.draw(0, 0);
```

### Operators

In C++, we can also reference an object using a pointer variable. A pointer does not reference the object itself, but the address in memory where the object is stored. To create a pointer variable, we need to add a star `*` right after the type when declaring the variable.

```cpp
ofImage* puppiesPtr;
```

Reference variables are automatically allocated and created as soon as they are declared. All variables we have put in our `ofApp` header so far have been created right as the program started running. 

Pointers on the other hand are not automatically created. They must be explicitly *instantiated* using the `new` operator. 

```cpp
puppiesPtr = new ofImage();
```

Pointers are also not automatically deleted. They must be explicitly *destroyed* using the `delete` operator when we are done with them. As a general rule, anything you create with `new`, you should eventually destroy with `delete` down the line.

```cpp
delete puppiesPtr;
```

To access the variables and functions contained inside an object referenced by a pointer, we have to use the arrow `->` operator.

```cpp
puppiesImg->load("puppies.img");
puppiesImg->draw(0, 0);
```

We can convert a reference to a pointer, this is called *address-of* . Putting an ampersand `&` operator in front of a reference variable will return its address in memory.

```cpp
ofImage puppiesImg;
ofImage* puppiesPtr = &puppiesImg;
```

Conversely, we can access the variable referenced by a pointer directly, which is called *dereferencing*. Putting a star `*` in front of a pointer variable will return the object it references.

```cpp
ofImage* puppiesPtr = new ofImage();
ofImage puppiesImg = *puppiesPtr;
```

### Arrays

Arrays have a close relationship with pointers. In fact, these are interchangeable in most cases.

{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-arrays.h %} 
{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-arrays1.cpp %}

An array reference is just a pointer to its first element. We can use pointer arithmetic to move this reference, and even to iterate through the array! 

{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-arrays2.cpp %}

### Pros

More control over object creation.
* We can choose when to create an object. For example, create a set of `ofImage` objects every time a new camera is plugged into the computer.
* We can choose how to create an object. Reference variables will use the default object *constructor* but pointer variables can use any available constructor.

```cpp
ofImage* puppiesPtr = new ofImage("puppies.png");
```

Simple variable passing.
* We have already seen that variables are passed by value by default. Whenever we use the assignment operator `=` or pass variables to a function, we are making copies of those variables. In some situations, we can pass the variable by reference with the `&` operator, but this is not always supported.
* When manipulating pointers, we are always just working with memory addresses, so we never inadvertently make copies of objects.

{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-pointers1.h %} 
{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-pointers1.cpp %}

### Cons

Memory management is up to the user. 
* It is up to you to make sure a pointer is referencing a valid object when using it. If you try to access an uninitialized pointer, your app will either crash or you will corrupt memory in other parts of the app.
* It is up to you to properly deallocate the memory when you are done. If you re-allocate a pointer before deleting its previous contents, you end up with a chunk of memory that is reserved but inaccessible. This is called a *memory leak*.

{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-pointers2.h %} 
{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-pointers2.cpp %}

* It is also up to you to make sure your pointer references are valid, which can become tricky when you have multiple pointers referencing the same object.

{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-pointers3.h %} 
{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-pointers3.cpp %}

### Shared Pointers

Shared pointers are a sort of middle ground between references and pointers. They are actually wrappers around pointers that handle all the memory management and reference counting for you, essentially getting rid of the cons listed above.

Shared pointers belong to a family of smart pointers, but we will only focus on shared pointers as they are the most common.

In a nutshell, they work the following way:
* A shared pointer is a templated type belonging to the `std` namespace: [`std::shared_ptr<T>`](http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/memory/shared_ptr/).
* A pointer is created using [`std::make_shared<>()`](http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/memory/make_shared/) or by assigning another pointer to it.
* A pointer is destroyed using [`std::shared_ptr<T>.reset()`](http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/memory/shared_ptr/reset/) or by simply setting it to `NULL`.
* Every time a new pointer to the same object is added, the reference count increases.
* Every time a pointer to that object is removed, the reference count decreases.
* When the reference count hits 0, the object is destroyed.

{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-sharedPtr.h %} 
{% gist 76985a0861c87f0370afc5170887ba0e ofApp-sharedPtr.cpp %}
