---
layout: post
title: "Logging"
categories: notes
---

openFrameworks has an advanced logging system that can be useful for reporting and debugging your applications.

Log messages have a "severity" level:
* `OF_LOG_VERBOSE`: For extra information (TMI)
* `OF_LOG_NOTICE`: For normal reporting, like status updates, state changes, etc.
* `OF_LOG_WARNING`: For minor errors that can be ignored, like an image that is not the dimensions you expected.
* `OF_LOG_ERROR`: For major errors that should be handled, like an image that fails to load because the file does not exist.
* `OF_LOG_FATAL_ERROR`: For showstopper errors, like not finding a camera for a vision based app.

Messages are output to the console using the [`ofLog(...)`](https://openframeworks.cc/documentation/utils/ofLog/#show_ofLog) method and passing a log level.

Note the use of the left-shift operator `<<`, which tends to be used when you are pushing or adding something to something else.

{% gist 508a5931b143bdd79d67981ac4d29260 ofApp-ofLog.cpp %}

You'll notice that all messages are output to the console except the first VERBOSE message. 

```
[ error ] ofImage: loadImage(): couldn't load image from ""puppies.png""
[ error ] Unable to load puppies image, make sure it's in the data folder!
[ fatal ] Unable to open camera, there's no reason to keep going :(
```

This is because the default log level is `OF_LOG_NOTICE`. This can be changed with a call to [`ofSetLogLevel()`](https://openframeworks.cc/documentation/utils/ofLog/#show_ofSetLogLevel). The parameter is any of the log levels listed above, or `OF_LOG_SILENT` which will disable all logging no matter what the severity is.

{% gist 508a5931b143bdd79d67981ac4d29260 ofApp-setLog.cpp %}

You may want to change the log level depending on if you're debugging your app, running it for a demo, or preparing a build for release. Instead of having to go through all your code and commenting or deleting all the log lines, a simple call to `ofSetLogLevel()` can set the appropriate level of console logging.

The `ofLog()` methods can be swapped out for their `ofLogXXX()` counterpart. So `ofLog(OF_LOG_NOTICE)` becomes `ofLogNotice()`, `ofLog(OF_LOG_ERROR)` becomes `ofLogError()` and so on, which is a little less verbose.

{% gist 508a5931b143bdd79d67981ac4d29260 ofApp-ofLogXXX.cpp %}

Another advantage of this version is that you can add an optional module as a parameter to the function. The module is just a string that can represent the part of the code you are dealing with.

{% gist 508a5931b143bdd79d67981ac4d29260 ofApp-ofLogModule.cpp %}

The module will prepend your log message in the output.

```
[ error ] ofImage: loadImage(): couldn't load image from ""puppies.png""
[ error ] Image Load: Unable to load puppies image, make sure it's in the data folder!
[ fatal ] Grabber Setup: Unable to open camera, there's no reason to keep going :(
```

Instead of coming up with a module name every time, you can also use the `__FUNCTION__` macro, which will automatically get replaced by the full method name during compilation.

{% gist 508a5931b143bdd79d67981ac4d29260 ofApp-ofLogFunc.cpp %}

```
[ error ] ofImage: loadImage(): couldn't load image from ""puppies.png""
[ error ] ofApp::setup: Unable to load puppies image, make sure it's in the data folder!
[ fatal ] ofApp::setup: Unable to open camera, there's no reason to keep going :(
```

Finally, ofLog does not necessarily need to log to the console. It sometimes might make more sense to log to a file that can be examined later, especially in the context of an installation going live. This can be done using the function [`ofLogToFile()`](https://openframeworks.cc/documentation/utils/ofLog/#show_ofLogToFile).

{% gist 508a5931b143bdd79d67981ac4d29260 ofApp-ofLogFile.cpp %}

You can also switch back to console logging with [`ofLogToConsole()`](https://openframeworks.cc/documentation/utils/ofLog/#show_ofLogToConsole).